HOLLAND, Justice:
The Court has before it Ronald L. Cantrell’s (“Cantrell”) original petition for a writ of habeas corpus and the State of Delaware’s motion to dismiss. It appears to the Court that the State’s motion must be granted.
Facts '
The Family Court found Cantrell in civil contempt for failure to pay child support and committed him to an indefinite period of level V incarceration until such time as Cantrell reduced his arrears by $2000. DiSabatino v. Salicete, Del.Supr., 671 A.2d 1344 (1996). The level V portion of the sentence was suspended for level IV home confinement. Cantrell was subsequently found to be in violation of the conditions of his home confinement and was placed at level V incarceration, pending the availability of bed space at a level IV halfway house. Cantrell filed a petition for an original writ of habeas corpus with this Court on June 11,1996.
Habeas Corpus Historically Child Support Enforcement
Prior to June 5, 1996, a person committed for contempt by the Family Court had a “specific entitlement to [seek] a writ of habe-as carpus in the Superior Court under 10 Del.C. § 6903.” Newman v. DCSE/Durkin, 672 A.2d 9, 11 (Del.1995) (emphasis added). In response to this Court’s holding in Newman, 10 Del.C. §§ 6901 and 6903(a) were amended with regard to Family Court cases involving child support enforcement.
Recent Legislation
As of June 5, 1996, those sections of Title 10 now read as follows:
§ 6901. Jurisdiction to Grant Writs.
The writ of habeas corpus shall be awarded and issued by the Superior Court except in cases involving child support enforcement in which ease the writ shall be awarded and issued by the Family Court. The writ may also be awarded and issued by the Family Court in other cases which are otherwise within its jurisdiction. A petition for the issuance of a writ of habeas corpus may be reviewed and decided by the judge issuing the order incarcerating the petitioner in the first instance, (emphasis added).
§ 6903. Person Committed for Contempt; Notice of Hearing.
(a) A person committed by any judge of this State, a justice of the peace, or by the mayor or any Alderman of any city or town, for a contempt, except a contempt issued by the Family Court in a case involving a child support order, shall be entitled to the writ of habeas corpus in the Superior Court. A person committed by the Family Court in a ease involving a child support order shall be entitled to the writ of habeas corpus in the Family Court of the State of Delaware, (emphasis added).
Conclusion
This Court has no original jurisdiction to issue a writ of habeas corpus. Rocker v. State, Del.Supr., 240 A.2d 141, 142 (1968); 10 Del.C. § 6901. Moreover, as of June 11, 1996, when Cantrell filed his petition for an original writ of habeas corpus with this Court, the legislature had vested exclusive jurisdiction over such applications with the Family Court, i.e., incarceration for non-payment of child support. 10 Del.C. §§ 6901, 6903(a). Cantrell’s petition manifestly fails on its face to invoke this Court’s original jurisdiction.
The State’s motion to dismiss must be granted. Cantrell’s petition for the issuance of a writ of habeas corpus is dismissed, pursuant to Supreme Court Rules 29(b) and 43.
PER CURIAM.
In this appeal, we affirm the trial court’s admission of the testimony of a surprise prosecution witness to the effect that the defendant had confessed to him. The State failed to inform the defense of the existence or testimony of this witness prior to calling him to testify on the last day of the State’s case-in-chief. We are asked to decide whether the State has a duty to disclose in advance the identity or testimony of a prosecution witness when such information is not exculpatory. We decide that it does not have such a duty.
Facts
On January 20, 1996, Chris Moore and his son Cecil engaged Dana Fleming in a physical confrontation concerning money that Chris Moore claimed Fleming owed him. On the evening of January 22, 1996, Hendrik Liket and two other friends of Chris Moore (the “co-defendants”) approached Irvin Moore (no relation to Chris or Cecil) at a bar near Newark, Delaware. Irvin Moore claims that Liket shoved a gun into his mouth, demanding to know Fleming’s whereabouts.
When he was able to get away, Irvin Moore called Fleming to warn him that Liket was on his way. While on the phone with Irvin Moore, Fleming saw Liket and the co-defendants pull into his driveway. Fleming testified that he saw Liket carrying a gun. Irvin Moore, who appeared on the scene soon thereafter, also testified that he saw Liket holding a gun. The police arrived prior to any confrontation between the parties and arrested Liket and the co-defendants following a short chase. At the time of the arrest, the police found no guns on the persons or in the vicinity of Liket and the co-defendants. The next day, Fleming reported, and the police recovered, a gun and a knife behind Fleming’s house. Although the State had no physical evidence linking these weapons to Liket, it contended that these weapons were the ones he brandished at Fleming’s house before the police arrived.
The State charged Liket with several felonies and misdemeanors: Attempted Assault in the First Degree, Possession of a Firearm during the Commission of a Felony (two counts), Aggravated Menacing, Conspiracy in the Second Degree, Reckless Endangering in the First Degree, Resisting Arrest, Criminal Trespass in the Third Degree and Criminal Mischief.
On the last day of the State’s ease-in-chief, the State called Matthew Feldman, whose existence the State had not previously disclosed to the defense. Feldman testified to a confession Liket made in the spring or summer of 1996. Specifically, Feldman testified that he gave Liket a ride home one day, during the course of which Liket confessed that he had threatened to kill Irvin Moore and that he had gone to Fleming’s house with a gun, intending to kill Fleming. Fleming’s counsel objected to Feldman’s testimony as a whole, but did not request additional time to prepare for this surprise witness.
At the conclusion of trial, the jury convicted Liket of all charges except Criminal Mischief and the trial court sentenced him to fifteen years’ imprisonment. Liket raises two contentions on appeal. He first contends that the trial court abused its discretion by admitting Feldman’s testimony on the ground that the State never revealed Feld-man’s existence to the defense prior to trial. Liket further argues that the State did not meet its burden of establishing beyond a reasonable doubt that he possessed a gun during the incident at Fleming’s house, a necessary element of several of the offenses of which the jury found him guilty.
Feldman’s Testimony
The admission of testimony over defense objections is within the sound discretion of the trial court and this Court will review the trial court’s decision solely for clear abuses of discretion.
The trial court allowed Feldman to testify, apparently agreeing with the State’s argument that the Delaware Superior Court Criminal Rules (“Criminal Rules”) do not require the State to furnish the defense with a list of possible witnesses at any point. Before allowing him to testify, the trial court conducted a special venire to ensure that no member of the jury had any objectionable connection to Feldman.
The State clearly has a duty to disclose any piece of evidence that might tend to be exculpatory. This includes the identity of witnesses whose testimony or background may tend to exculpate the defendant. This duty, however, does not extend to the disclosure of material that is non-exculpatory. When the testimony or background of a witness offers no exculpatory value, the State does not have to disclose the identity of that witness prior to that witness’ testimony.
Delaware case law is not the only source for this conclusion. The Criminal Rules address the State’s discovery obligations in a criminal trial. Criminal Rule 16(a), setting forth the specific discovery obligations, nowhere requires that the State disclose the existence of witnesses. By contrast, the Superior Court Civil Rules and the Court of Chancery Rules specifically require parties to provide pre-trial witness lists. This implies that the failure of the Superior Court to include language requiring pre-trial discovery of witness lists in the Criminal Rules was not merely an oversight.
Although not binding on these proceedings, the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure offer some valuable insight into the issue of pre-trial discovery of prosecution witnesses. Rule 16 of the Federal Rules, dealing with discovery obligations of both parties, does not require either party to disclose potential witnesses prior to trial. The Advisory Committee Historical Notes to Federal Criminal Rule 16 demonstrate an attempt by the Advisory Committee to amend Rule 16 to require the prosecution to disclose witnesses upon a request from the defense. A joint conference of the United States House of Representatives and the United States Senate rejected this provision, stating that “[i]t is not in the interest of the effective administration of criminal justice to require that the government or the defendant be forced to reveal the names and addresses of its witnesses before trial.”
Liket concedes that Feldman’s existence was not exculpatory in any way. Considering the fact that the State has no duty summarily to disclose its potential witnesses, the remainder of Liket’s claims lack merit. He claims that the State, in failing to disclose Feldman’s existence prior to trial, subjected him to unfair surprise. As the United States Supreme Court has stated in denying relief on a similar claim, “[i]f the defense felt unprepared to undertake effective cross-examination, one would think a formal motion for continuance would have been forthcoming, but none was ever made; counsel moved only that the evidence be excluded.” In this case, Liket merely objected to the admission of Feldman’s testimony. He cannot now object that the State’s failure to disclose denied him the right effectively to examine Feldman when he failed to request a continuance that would have given him that time.
Liket claims that the State’s failure to disclose Feldman’s testimony denied him the right to plea bargain effectively. But the constitution provides no such right. He next argues that the surprise witness denied him the effective assistance of counsel, a claim that is inappropriate on direct appeal. Finally, Liket claims that the State’s failure to disclose Feldman’s existence impermissibly tainted the effectiveness of the jury venire. In this case, the trial court conducted a special inquiry of the jury regarding Feldman, solving this potential problem. Considering the foregoing, we find that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in admitting Feldman’s testimony.
The Weapons-Related Charges
Liket contends that no rational trier of fact could have found him guilty of the charges that included possession of a weapon as an element. In deciding such questions, this Court conducts a de novo review to determine whether any rational trier of fact, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, could find Liket guilty beyond a reasonable doubt of the firearms related charges. But we review only for clear error if the defendant has failed to properly preserve this issue by raising a timely motion for judgment of acquittal to the trial court.
In this case, Liket failed to produce any portion of the trial record evidencing a motion for judgment of acquittal. Even under the typical de novo review, however, Liket’s claim must fail. The issue of whether he brandished a gun at Fleming’s residence is an issue of witness credibility to be decided by the jury. We find that a rational trier of fact, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, could find Liket guilty beyond a reasonable doubt based simply upon the witness testimony at trial. The trial court did not commit a clear error in permitting Liket’s conviction for the weapons related charges.
Conclusion
In light of the foregoing, we affirm Liket’s convictions.
1
. We are not asked to decide, and therefore do not address, the issue of whether a trial judge can require such disclosure with a specific pretrial order.
2
. See Lloyd v. State, Del.Supr., 622 A.2d 1096 (1993).
3
. Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83, 83 S.Ct. 1194, 10 L.Ed.2d 215 (1963); Gattis v. State, Del.Supr., 697 A.2d 1174, 1179 (1997).
4
. See Lilly v. State, Del.Supr., 649 A.2d 1055, 1057 (1994); State v. Anderson, Del.Super., C.A. No. IN-91-09-0959-R1, 1996 WL 769265 (1996).
5
. See Lilly, 649 A.2d at 1058.
6
. See State v. Stewart, Del.Super., 1987 WL 6449 (1987) (“Defendant also contends that the State was obliged to disclose the existence of this witness and the nature of his testimony prior to calling him. No such obligation on the part of the State exists....”).
7
. The Superior Court’s 1991 Criminal Administrative Order, at Section 8(c), states that the State must comply "with any requested disclosures pursuant to Superior Court Criminal Rule 16(a)(1) through (3).” But Section 8(c) only applies where the dispute concerns whether the requested materials either fall under Rule 16 or are worthy of a protective order. Even had Liket made a pre-trial request for disclosure of a witness list (and Liket presents no evidence to so indicate). Rule 16 does not apply to disclosure of the existence of State witnesses.
8
. Superior Court Civil Rule 127(a) states, "[w]ithin seven days of filing of the answer, a plaintiff shall serve upon the answering defendant ... a list of witnesses that plaintiff intends to call at trial.” Superior Court Civil Rule 130 states that if the parties choose to present the testimony of live witnesses, they must provide a pre-trial order that includes, "a list of the witnesses each party expects to introduce at trial.”
9
. Court of Chancery Rule 16(b) requires that, unless the Court otherwise directs, both parties submit pre-trial orders. Rule 16(c)(6) requires that such pre-trial orders include, "[a] list of witnesses, including experts, who will be called by each party at the trial.... ”
10
. In support of this amendment, the Advisory Committee noted twenty two states (not including Delaware) that require the prosecution to disclose its potential witnesses to the defense prior to trial. It should be noted that in each of these twenty two states, the basis for this duty is rooted in a rule or statute, rather than general constitutional protections. Fed.R.Crim.P. 16, Advisory Committee Historical Notes.
11
. Id.
12
. Gray v. Netherland, 518 U.S. 152, 167, 116 S.Ct. 2074, 135 L.Ed.2d 457 (1996), quoting Gray v. Thompson, 58 F.3d 59, 64 (4th Cir.1995).
13
. See Weatherford v. Bursey, 429 U.S. 545, 546, 97 S.Ct. 837, 51 L.Ed.2d 30 (1977).
14
. See Duross v. State, Del.Supr., 494 A.2d 1265, 1267 (1985).
15
. See Davis v. State, Del.Supr., 706 A.2d 523, 525 (1998) (Per curiam); Williams v. State, Del. Supr., 539 A.2d 164, 168, cert. denied, 488 U.S. 969, 109 S.Ct. 500, 102 L.Ed.2d 536 (1988).
16
. See Gordon v. State, Del.Supr., 604 A.2d 1367, 1368 (1992); Del.Super.Ct.Cr.R. 29.
17
. See Quarles v. State, Del.Supr., 696 A.2d 1334, 1340 (1997); Knight v. State, Del.Supr., 690 A.2d 929, 932 (1996).
HOLLAND, Justice:
This is an appeal by the employer-appellant, State of Delaware (“State”), from a judgment of the Superior Court. That judgment affirmed the Industrial Accident Board’s (“Board”) award of workers’ compensation to the claimant-appellee, Wayne Steen (“Steen”). The final judgment on appeal to this Court was issued by the Superior Court following a second hearing before the Board. The Board’s prior decision, denying Steen’s claim, had been reversed and remanded by the Superior Court.
The State has raised one issue on appeal. It argues that the Superior Court erred, as a matter of law, by affirming the Board’s ruling not to permit the parties to offer evidence or legal argument during the Board hearing upon remand. We agree. Accordingly, the matter must be remanded to the Board for a new hearing, in accordance with the mandates of applicable Delaware statutes.
Facts
On June 12, 1995, Steen suffered a ruptured aneurysm in his brain. He began to experience symptoms of the rupture while performing his regular duties as the Deputy Chief of the Mill Creek Volunteer Fire Company. At the time, he was the officer in charge of a car accident that had seriously injured five people, including one teenage girl who died at the scene. While giving instructions to fire department personnel, Steen said he did not feel well. He stated that his head hurt and his ears were ringing. Two other firemen escorted Steen to the back of the fire truck, where he began to vomit.
Steen was rushed to the emergency room of Christiana Hospital. After being taken to the trauma room and placed on a respirator, Steen was examined by Dr. Najam. Kazmi, M.D. (“Dr. Kazmi”), a board certified neurosurgeon. Dr. Kazmi ordered a CAT scan and an arteriogram. The tests indicated that Steen had suffered a subarachnoid hemorrhage secondary to a ruptured aneurysm in the anterior portion of his brain. As a result, Steen is permanently disabled and confined to a wheelchair for the remainder of his life.
Board’s First Decision
On March 22, 1996, Steen filed a Petition to Determine Compensation Due before the Board. The Board convened an evidentiary hearing on July 9, 1996. The Board denied Steen’s petition on October 28, 1996. Steen appealed to the Superior Court.
The primary issue on the first appeal to the Superior Court was the proper legal standard of proximate causation to apply in examining Steen’s claim for workers’ compensation. At the first hearing, the Board accepted the parties mutual agreement to apply the “but for” standard of proximate causation. The Superior Court held that the Board erred, as a matter of law, by not using the “substantial factor” standard of proximate cause to evaluate Steen’s claim. Therefore, the Superior Court issued an opinion reversing the decision of the Board and remanding the case to the Board for a new hearing.
Proximate Cause Standard Substantial Factor or But For Workers’ Compensation Determinations
In the context of addressing Delaware’s new contributory negligence statute in a tort case, this Court noted that the “but for” test and the “substantial factor” test are two different standards for determining proximate cause. Culver v. Bennett, Del.Supr., 588 A.2d 1094, 1097 (1991) (citing W. Keeton, Prosser and Keeton on the Law of Torts 266 (5th ed.1984)). Prosser and Keeton have summarized the “but for” or sine qua non rule as: “The defendant’s conduct is a cause of the event if the event would not have occurred but for that conduct; conversely, the defendant’s conduct is not a cause of the event, if the event would have occurred without it.” Prosser and Keeton on Torts 266. Prosser and Keeton have summarized the “substantial factor” rule as: “the defendant’s conduct is a cause of the event if it was a material element and a substantial factor in bringing it about.” Id. at 267.
In Culver, this Court held that in Delaware tort cases, proximate cause must be determined exclusively by an application of the “but for” standard. Culver v. Bennett, 588 A.2d at 1099. Similarly, in Reese v. Home Budget Center, in the context, of a specific and identifiable industrial accident, this Court held that “the ‘but for’ definition of proximate cause in the substantive law of torts finds equal application in fixing the relationship between an acknowledged industrial accident and its aftermath.” Reese v. Home Budget Center, Del.Supr., 619 A.2d 907, 910 (1992). In Reese, we explained
If the worker had a preexisting disposition to a certain physical or emotional injury which had not manifested itself prior to the time of the accident, an injury attributable to the accident is compensable if the injury would not have occurred but for the accident. The accident need not be the sole cause or even a substantial cause of the injury. If the accident provides the “setting” or “trigger,” causation is satisfied for purposes of compensability,
619 A.2d at 910. We reaffirm that holding in Reese: when there is an identifiable industrial accident, the compensability of any resultant injury must be determined exclusively by an application of the “but for” standard of proximate cause. Id.
In cases where a claimant is injured by the aggravation of a pre-existing condition and there is no identifiable industrial accident, however, causation is governed by the usual exertion rule. Duvall v. Charles Connell Roofing, Del.Supr., 564 A.2d 1132, 1136 (1989). The usual exertion rule provides that the injury is compensable, notwithstanding the previous condition, if the ordinary stress and strain of employment is a “substantial factor” in causing the injury. Id. In Reese, this Court explained that the substantial factor standard of proximate cause was adopted in Duvall “because of the difficulty of identifying a specific link between regular job-related duties and the aggravation of preexisting ailments.” Reese v. Home Budget Center, 619 A.2d at 911.
A similar difficulty was also recognized by this Court when a claimant seeks workers’ compensation for a mental injury that was not the result of a specific trauma but rather was due to gradual and ordinary job-related stress. See State v. Cephas, Del. Supr., 637 A.2d 20 (1994). In Cephas, this Court reaffirmed the distinction between the factual predicate for determining compensability pursuant to either the “but for” standard of proximate cause, as explained in the Reese holding, or the “substantial factor” standard of proximate cause, as adopted in the Duvall holding. Id. at 27-28. An injured claimant can recover workers’ compensation benefits when there is no specifically identifiable physical industrial accident, as long as the ordinary stress and strain of employment is a substantial factor in proximately causing the injury. State v. Cephas, 637 A.2d at 27. Accord Reese v. Home Budget Center, Del.Supr., 619 A.2d 907, 911 (1992); Duvall v. Charles Connell Roofing, Del.Supr., 564 A.2d 1132, 1136 (1989). See also Page v. Hercules, Del.Supr., 637 A.2d 29, 33 (1994).
Superior Court’s First Opinion Legal Standard of Causation Correctly Decided
In this case, the record reflects that Steen had an “unknown pre-existing physical condition or defect” in the form of a brain aneurysm. The medical experts for both parties testified that Steen’s aneurysm had probably existed for as long as five to ten years before it ruptured. Thus, it is undisputed that Steen had an aneurysm of which he was unaware until the day it ruptured during the performance of his ordinary duties as a volunteer fireman.
The Superior Court’s analysis of the difference between and application of the “but for” and “substantial factor” standards of proximate cause was thorough and entirely correct. The “substantial factor” standard is used in Delaware to determine whether the usual conditions of employment provided the causative nexus for compensability only in the absence of an industrial accident “because of the difficulty of identifying a specific link between regular job-related duties and the aggravation of preexisting ailments.” Reese v. Home Budget Center, Del.Supr., 619 A.2d 907, 911 (1992). Because Steen’s aneurysm was pre-existing and because Steen did not experience an identifiable physical accident, the Superior Court properly held that, as a matter of law, the substantial factor standard of proximate cause, as explained in Duvall, had to be applied by the Board in determining the compensability of Steen’s claim.
The Superior Court then ended its first opinion, as follows: “For all the foregoing reasons, the decision of the Industrial Accident Board denying Wayne Steen’s petition for workmen’s compensation benefits is reversed, and the cause is remanded to the Board for further consideration consistent with this Opinion.”
Board Hearing on Remand
Following the Superior Court’s remand, the Board wrote a letter to the parties, informing them that the Board would convene for the hearing after remand on May 14, 1997. The Board advised the parties that no additional evidence or testimony would be permitted. The State’s attorney inquired whether legal argument could be presented at the remand hearing. The Board replied that the attorneys could attend the hearing but could not participate.
At the remand hearing, the attorney for the State again inquired whether legal argument would be permitted. The Board again stated that counsel for the parties could not participate in the hearing. The Board then permitted the parties’ attorneys to listen to its deliberations, but refused to allow the parties’ either to submit evidence or make any legal argument.
The Board issued a decision dated July 22, 1997. The Board applied the Duvall substantial factor standard for determining proximate cause, as instructed by the Superi- or Court’s order of remand. The Board found that Steen’s work was a substantial factor in the rupture of the aneurysm in his brain. Accordingly, the Board decided to reverse its prior decision and granted Steen’s petition for workers’ compensation.
Superior Court’s Second Opinion
The Superior Court affirmed the Board’s decision to award Steen compensation following the remand proceedings. The Superior Court also affirmed the Board’s decision not to permit the parties to present new evidence or legal argument at the hearing on remand. The State contends that the Superior Court’s affirmance of the Board’s procedural decision was incorrect, as a matter of law. The State argues that procedural error can be rectified only by remanding this matter for a properly conducted substantive hearing before the Board on the merits of Steen’s claim. We agree.
Remand to Board Participatory Hearing Required
19 Del.C. § 2350(b) provides:
In case of every appeal to the Superior Court the cause shall be determined by the Court from the record, which shall include a typewritten copy of the evidence and the finding and award of the Board, without the aid of a jury, and the Court may reverse, affirm or modify the award of the Board or remand the cause to the Board for a rehearing. In case any cause shall be remanded to the Board for a rehearing, the procedure and the rights of all parties to such cause shall be the same as in the case of the original hearing before the Board.
Pursuant to this subsection, the Superior Court is authorized by statute to do one of four things: “reverse, affirm or modify the award of the Board or remand the cause to the Board for a rehearing.” In Steen’s case, the Superior Court reversed the Board’s decision and stated that “... the cause is remanded to the Board for further consideration consistent with this Opinion. The Board shall issue a written decision resolving each issue addressed in this Opinion.” Thus, the record reflects that the option in Section 2350(b) chosen by the Superior Court, in discharging its function of intermediate appellate review, was to “remand the cause to the Board for a rehearing.” Section 2350(b) also explains the legal effect of a remand order:
In case any cause shall be remanded to the Board for a rehearing, the procedure and the rights of all parties shall be the same as in the case of the original hearing before the Board.
At an original hearing, the parties have the statutory right to present evidence and legal argument to support their own positions and to challenge evidence or any legal argument to the contrary. See 19 Del.C. § 2348. If there is a remand, Section 2348(d) further provides that:
Whenever a cause shall be remanded to the Board for a rehearing, all evidence therefore taken before the Board in a previous hearing or hearings shall become part of the evidence in the hearing upon remand.
When Section 2350(b) and 2348(d) are read in pari materia, the statutory scheme for conducting a hearing on remand is unambiguous. The Board is to decide the matter, after the remand hearing, on the basis of the evidence from the prior hearing plus any new evidence and legal arguments the parties decide to present.
The focus of the inquiry at any Board hearing on a petition for workers’ compensation is to identify whether there is a proximate cause between the employee’s work and the employee’s injury. When the Steen case was remanded to the Board, both parties had a statutory right to litigate at the hearing on remand “as in the case of the original hearing before the Board.” .Section 2350(b). That statutory right was of particular importance in Steen’s case because the attorneys for both parties and the Board had proceeded at the original hearing according to the incorrect “but for” standard of proximate cause in presenting, defending, and deciding Steen’s claim for workers’ compensation.
If the parties had been allowed to participate in the hearing upon remand, they could have presented evidence from their respective experts and legal arguments under the correct “substantial factor” standard of proximate cause, pursuant to the mandate of the Superior Court’s first opinion. The substantial factor standard of proximate cause permits the employee to recover in the absence of an identifiable accident, notwithstanding a pre-existing condition, if the employee can demonstrate through expert testimony that his or her usual employment was “a material element and a substantial factor in bringing it about.” Culver v. Bennett, 588 A.2d at 1097 (quoting W. Keeton, Prosser and Keeton on the Law of Torts 266 (5th ed.1984)). Accord Duvall v. Charles Connell Roofing, Del.Supr., 564 A.2d 1132, 1136 (1989), Reese v. Home Budget Center, Del. Supr., 619 A.2d 907, 910 (1992), State v. Cephas, Del.Supr., 637 A.2d 20, 27 (1994). Conversely, the employee’s injury is not com-pensable, if the employer can demonstrate through expert medical testimony that the injury would have been sustained by the employee, even in the absence of the usual stress and strain of his or her employment. Culver v. Bennett, 588 A.2d at 1097 (quoting W. Keeton, Prosser and Keeton on the Law of Torts 266 (5th ed.1984)). Accord Duvall v. Charles Connell Roofing, Del.Supr., 564 A.2d 1132, 1136 (1989), Reese v. Home Budget Center, Del.Supr., 619 A.2d 907, 910 (1992), Page v. Hercules, Inc., Del.Supr., 637 A.2d 29, 33 (1994).
The statutory language is unambiguous. See 19 Del.C. §§ 2350(b) and 2348(d). The parties had a statutory right to participate in the rehearing on remand by presenting additional evidence and legal argument in accordance with the proper “substantial factor” standard of proximate cause. The absolute denial of the State’s statutory rights by the Board constituted reversible error.
Conclusion
The judgment of the Superior Court is reversed. This matter is remanded to the Superior Court for remand to the Board and a new hearing in accordance with this opinion.
1
. Volunteer firemen are treated as State employees for purposes of workmen’s compensation, pursuant to 19 Del.C. § 2312.
2
. In Duvall, the claimant exacerbated a pre-exist-ing back condition while performing routine duties at work. Workers compensation benefits were denied because he was not engaged in "unusual exertion” at the time of the injury. On appeal, this Court abandoned the "unusual exertion” rule for pre-existing conditions and adopted instead the "usual exertion” rule. Duvall v. Charles Connell Roofing, Del.Supr., 564 A.2d 1132, 1133 (1989).
WALSH, Justice:
In this appeal from the Superior Court, we are required to determine whether the automatic revocation of driving privileges that must be imposed at the time of sentencing for certain drug offenses is a direct penal consequence of a plea of guilty. The Superi- or Court ruled that the license revocation was a collateral consequence of a plea of guilty and the defendant’s awareness of that consequence was not required incident to the acceptance of the plea under the applicable Superior Court Criminal Rule. We conclude, however, that the immediate and automatic imposition of the revocation at the time of sentencing constitutes a direct penal consequence of a plea of guilty. We further conclude that a defendant must be advised of that consequence in connection with the entry of a guilty plea. Accordingly, the Superi- or Court’s refusal to permit withdrawal of a guilty plea by a defendant not so advised is error and must be reversed.
I
On September 16, 1997, appellant, Eric Barkley (“Barkley”), pursuant to a plea bargain, entered a guilty plea to a charge of possession of cocaine, in violation of 16 Del.C. § 4763. On the same date, the Superior Court sentenced Barkley to one year level Y incarceration suspended for one year level III probation, suspended after six months for six months level II probation. Following sentencing, the New Castle County Protho-notary notified the Delaware Division of Motor Vehicles that Barkley’s driver’s license should be revoked for two years pursuant to 21 Del.C. § 4177K(a) as a result of his conviction for the possession offense.
On January 22, 1998, Barkley filed a motion pursuant to Superior Court Criminal Rule 61 to set aside his earlier guilty plea. His claim was that if he had known that his license would be revoked as a result of his guilty plea, he would not have pleaded guilty to the charges against him. The Superior Court denied the motion, in reliance upon an earlier decision of that court which determined that the automatic suspension mandated by 21 Del.C. § 4177K(a) was a collateral consequence of a guilty plea, the disclosure of which was not required at the time of a plea of guilty. Barkley filed a motion for reargument which was denied by the Superior Court. This appeal followed.
II
The ruling of the Superior Court that the suspension of driving privileges under 21 DelC. § 4177K(a) is a collateral consequence of a conviction following a guilty plea is one of law. Our standard of review is thus de novo. Lewis v. State, Del.Supr., 626 A.2d 1350, 1354 (1993).
The general standards that underpin the acceptance of a guilty plea under Delaware law are well established. A judge who accepts a guilty plea must be satisfied that the plea is entered knowingly and voluntarily. Sullivan v. State, Del.Supr., 636 A.2d 931, 937, cert denied, 513 U.S. 833, 115 S.Ct. 110, 130 L.Ed.2d 57 (1994); Brown v. State, Del.Supr., 250 A.2d 503, 505 (1969). To ensure a plea is knowing and voluntary, a trial judge must be certain the defendant understands the direct consequences of pleading guilty. Brady v. United States, 397 U.S. 742, 755, 90 S.Ct. 1463, 25 L.Ed.2d 747 (1970). “The direct consequences of a plea are covered in Federal Rule 11, after which this [cjourt’s Rule 11 (effective in January 1992) was patterned.” State v. Christie, Del.Super., 655 A.2d 836, 839, aff'd, Del.Supr., 655 A.2d 306 (1994). The consequences required to be explored in the colloquy by the trial judge are enumerated in Superior Court Criminal Rule 11(c).
In support of the Superior Court’s ruling, the State, without disputing Barkley’s claim that he was not advised of the application of 21 DelC. § 4177K(a), argues, in effect, that Barkley’s understanding of its application as a consequence of his plea is irrelevant since the loss of driving privileges is a mere collateral result of his guilty plea. The State contends that the mandatory loss of one’s driving privileges is a civic consequence that is analogous to a convicted felon’s loss of the right to vote or serve on a jury. See Del. Const. art. V, § 2; 10 Del.C. § 4509(b)(6). The historic rationale for both of those civic consequences can be traced to ancient Greece and was not punishment but to protect the legal system from corruption by the participation of felons. See Gary L. Reback, Disenfranchisement of Ex-felons: A Reassessment, 25 STANFORD L.REV. 845 (1973); Note, The Disenfranchisement of Ex-felons: Citizenship, Criminality and the Purity of the Ballot Box, 102 HARV.L.REV. 1300 (1989).
This Court has not defined the term “direct consequence” but it has found a definition under federal sentencing decisions. “A direct consequence is one that has a ‘definite, immediate, and largely automatic effect’ on the range of the defendant’s punishment.” Parry v. Rosemeyer, 3rd Cir., 64 F.3d 110, 114 (1995), cert. denied, 516 U.S. 1058, 116 S.Ct. 734, 133 L.Ed.2d 684 (1996), quoting Cuthrell v. Director, Patuxent Inst., 4th Cir., 475 F.2d 1364, 1366, cert. denied, 414 U.S. 1005, 94 S.Ct. 362, 38 L.Ed.2d 241 (1973). An example of a direct consequence is a mandatory minimum term of imprisonment or a mandatory parole term imposed by statute. See Carter v. McCarthy, 9th Cir., 806 F.2d 1373, 1376 (1986), cert. denied, 484 U.S. 870, 108 S.Ct. 198, 98 L.Ed.2d 149 (1987). Superior Court Criminal Rule 11(c), which governs the issue before us, requires that the trial judge be satisfied that the defendant understands the “mandatory minimum penalty provided by law.” If the license revocation is a “penalty,” it must be disclosed and understood as part of the plea colloquy under the Rule.
A collateral consequence “is one that is not related to the length or nature of the sentence imposed on the basis of the plea.” United States v. Romero-Vilca, 3d Cir., 850 F.2d 177, 179 (1988); Kincade v. United States, 3rd Cir., 559 F.2d 906, 909 (per curiam), cert. denied, 434 U.S. 970, 98 S.Ct. 519, 54 L.Ed.2d 458 (1977). In Romero-Vilca, the defendant moved to invalidate his guilty plea on the basis that the trial court had failed to inform him that he could face deportation because of his guilty plea. 850 F.2d at 179. The Court of Appeals in rejecting that claim, concluded that while deportation might follow, it was a potential result and thus merely a collateral consequence of the plea. Id.
Although this Court has not directly ruled upon the question of whether loss of driving privileges is a collateral consequence of a guilty plea, we did note, in a different context, that license revocation “proceedings initiated under habitual offender statutes are considered civil administrative actions.” Villa v. State, Del.Supr., 456 A.2d 1229, 1231 (1983). Because the revocation proceedings were civil, we ruled in Villa that a defendant pleading to a traffic offense need not be advised of the consequences of a future revocation proceeding. Id. at 1230, 1232.
The present appeal, however, is not controlled by our holding in Villa. Unlike a revocation proceeding based on habitual driving offenses, the revocation mandated by 21 Del.C. § 4177K(a) is not accomplished through a separate administrative proceeding. In fact, the language of the statute supports the conclusion that the General Assembly considered it to be one of the “other penalties” relating to controlled substances. That subsection provides:
Any person who pleads guilty to or is convicted of, including a guilty plea or conviction pursuant to § 4764 of Title 16, possession of a controlled substance under §§ 4752, 4753, 4754, 4754A of Title 16 ... shall, in addition to any and all other penalties provided by law, have the person’s driver’s license and/or driving privileges revoked by the Secretary for a period of 2 years from the date of sentencing.
(Emphasis supplied).
Indeed, as we understand the practice the defendant is required to' surrender his driver’s license at the time of sentencing if it is in his possession. 21 Del.C. § 4177K(c). More importantly, the Division of Motor Vehicles is notified by the Prothonotary of the Superior Court that the two year revocation has been imposed effective as of the date of sentencing. Neither the statute nor the Superior Court’s own procedures contemplate that any further administrative action will occur, or is authorized, except that the defendant may receive “additional” notice of the revocation from the Division of Motor Vehicles. In our view, the revocation accomplished by the sentencing judge under 21 Del.C. § 4177K is a penalty and, not only a direct consequence of the sentencing, but a necessary and integral part of the sentencing process. Unlike the deportation proceeding implicated in State v. Christie, Barkley’s loss of driving privileges at the time of sentencing was an immediate, automatic and mandatory penalty.
The Superior Court based its rejection of Barkley’s petition to withdraw his guilty plea on an earlier ruling of the Superior Court that interpreted the application of 21 Del.C. § 4177K(a). In State v. Scott, Del.Super., Crim.A. No. IK93-12-0530R1, 1994 WL 773686 (Feb. 1, 1995), the court concluded that the loss of driving privileges under § 4177K was a collateral consequence of a guilty plea because “[t]he risk of losing one’s driving license is not on the list and is, in fact, clearly only a collateral consequence of the plea.” 1994 WL 773686 at *3. The “list” referred to by the court is apparently those subjects that Superior Court Criminal Rule 11(c) requires the court to explore with the defendant to assure his understanding. In our view, the Scott court’s treatment of the issue and its construction of Rule 11(c) under the principle of “inclusio unius est exclusio alterius ” is an incomplete analysis for determining direct or collateral consequences of a guilty plea. The Scott court did not analyze the revocation as a penalty characterized as such in the statute, thus triggering the colloquy requirement under Rule 11(c). The Rule requires explanation by the court, and understanding by the defendant of, inter alia, “the mandatory minimum penalty provided by law, if any,” a concept of sufficient flexibility in, our view, to include the immediate and automatic revocation of driving privileges.
The State argues that since the State’s granting of a license to operate a motor vehicle is a privilege, not a right, the denial of that privilege may not give rise to a claim of lack of due process. The State’s position that a driver’s license is a privilege is generally correct and its argument relating to the consequences of that status as a privilege may be valid in the context of administrative proceedings leading to license revocation. But, it misses the mark in this case where, for purposes of Rule 11(c) in light of the statutory language, the revocation occurs as an automatic and mandatory penal consequence of the sentencing process. Because the revocation is part of the “mandatory minimum penalty” under Rule 11(c), as we now hold, the failure to secure the defendant’s understanding of that consequence, constitutes a violation of the Rule. That violation is entitled to redress as a matter of the proper interpretation of Rule 11(c) and regardless of its constitutional implications which we need not decide.
We conclude that the entry of a plea of guilty in this case, was not made with the knowledge of the direct penal consequence of that plea under 21 Del.C. § 4177K(a), as required by Rule 11(c). Accordingly, the appellant’s petition to withdraw his plea, should not have been dismissed, as a matter of law. The decision of the Superior Court is REVERSED and the matter REMANDED for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
1
. 21 Del.C. § 4177K. Revocation of license for persons convicted of all drugs offenses.
(a) Any person who pleads guilty to or is convicted of, including a guilty plea or conviction pursuant to § 4764 of Title 16, possession of a controlled substance under §§ 4752, 4753, 4754, 4754A of Title 16 ... shall, in addition to any and all other penalties provided by law, have the person's driver’s license and/or driving privileges revoked by the Secretary for a period of 2 years from the date of sentencing.
2
. (c) Advice to Defendant.
... Before accepting a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a felony or a class A misdemean- or, or to any other offense for which a sentence of imprisonment will be imposed, the court must address the defendant personally in open court and inform the defendant of, and determine that the defendant understands the following:
(1) The nature of the charge to which the plea is offered, the mandatory minimum penalty provided by law, if any, and the maximum possible penalty provided by law, the fact that the court is required to consider any applicable sentencing guidelines but may depart from those guidelines under some circumstances, and, when applicable, that the court may also order the defendant to make restitution to any victim of the offense; and.... Super.Ct.Crim.R. 11(c)
(Emphasis supplied).
3
. The notice mandated by our ruling today is easily accomplished by insertion of appropriate language in the Guilty Plea Form in common usage in Delaware courts. Proof of execution of that form by a defendant is generally considered sufficient evidence of knowledge of the consequences of a guilty plea and waiver of rights. See Somerville v. State, Del.Supr., 703 A.2d 629, 632 (1997).
QUILLEN, J.
This is the Court’s opinion on Defendant Shell Oil Company’s two Motions for Summary Judgment pursuant to Superior Court Civil Rule 56. For the reasons given herein, Defendant’s Motions for Summary Judgment on the claims of implied warranty of merchantability, implied warranty of fitness for a particular purpose, express warranty, civil conspiracy and deceptive trade practices are GRANTED. Motions for Summary Judgment as to the negligence claims, consumer fraud and the allocation of damages are DENIED.
I. FACTS
This action involves a dispute between the owner of residential housing units and the manufacturer of raw materials utilized in the production of polybutylene pipes. The central issue is whether the Defendant, as a supplier of the resin used to manufacture polybutylene pipes, is liable for the damages caused by the failure of the unit’s plumbing system.
Plaintiff, S&R Associates, L.P., III (“S&R”), is the owner of The Arbor Pointe Apartment Complex, located at 4000 Dawn-brook Drive, in Wilmington, Delaware. The Arbor Pointe complex was constructed in 1985 and consists of 264 rental units. The plumbing system installed at the complex utilized “polybutylene” pipes, a material chosen for its relatively low cost and light weight.
Defendant, Shell Oil Company (“Shell”), manufactures polybutylene, a resin used in the manufacture of polybutylene pipes. Shell did not, however, manufacture the products used in the Arbor Point Apartment Complex. Shell produced and sold polybu-tylene resin to certain customers, who in turn used the resin to manufacture polybutylene pipes. These pipes were connected with ace-tal fittings and metal crimp rings to form the “polybutylene plumbing system.”
While Shell did not directly sell the poly-butylene pipes, it actively participated in the promotion of polybutylene plumbing systems and used its corporate symbol on promotional literature. This promotional material included representations that polybutylene pipe was lighter, more freeze resistant and less expensive than copper pipe. S&R also asserts that the literature represented that polybutylene pipe “would last as long as copper pipe,” although no documentation presented explicitly supports this proposition.
Arbor Pointe experienced serious and systematic problems with the plumbing system from its inception. These failures continued for years and included a break in October of 1989 that flooded three units. Apparently, a defect in the polybutylene system caused the pipes and fittings to crack when exposed to chlorinated water. Plaintiff asserts that, despite the severity and frequency of the leaks, S&R did not realize these leaks were attributed to a defect in the polybutylene system until 1993, when one of S&R’s agents had conversations with others in the property management business. S&R also asserts that Shell was aware of this inherent defect in the system as far back as 1980 and actively concealed this fact from the public.
In 1994, S&R filed suit alleging that the polybutylene plumbing system, including the polybutylene pipes, was defective and would continue to fail. S&R’s complaint has asserted eleven separate counts, the majority sounding in either contract, fraud or negligence. Subsequently, Shell moved for summary judgment with respect to eight claims, including those for breach of the warranty, civil conspiracy, consumer fraud and certain negligence claims.
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
When considering a motion for summary judgment, the Court’s function is to examine the record to determine whether genuine issues of material fact exist. Oliver B. Cannon & Sons, Inc. v. Dorr-Oliver, Inc., Del.Super., 312 A.2d 322, 325 (1973). If after viewing the record in a light most favorable to the non-moving party, the Court finds that there are no genuine issues of material fact, summary judgment will be appropriate. Id. Summary judgment will not be granted if the record indicates that a material fact is in dispute or if it seems desirable to inquire more thoroughly into the facts in order to clarify the application of law to the circumstances. Ebersole v. Lowengrub, Del.Supr., 180 A.2d 467 (1962).
III. DISCUSSION
A. BREACH OF CONTRACT
Counts one through three of S&R’s complaint allege breach of both express and implied warranties. Shell counters by asserting that S&R did not file its complaint before the statute of limitations had expired and that there is no reason the statute should be tolled. They also contend that S&R, as a limited partnership, is not the type of entity entitled to breach of warranty protection under 6 Del. C. § 2-318.
The Court is persuaded by Shell’s arguments and all counts sounding in contract are dismissed because: 1) S&R has failed to file an action before the statute of limitations had expired; 2) Shell, as an entity supplier of raw materials, was not in direct contractual privity with S&R; and 3) S&R, as a limited partnership, lacks standing as a third party beneficiary of a contractual warranty under 6 Del. C. § 2-318.
1. Statute of Limitations
S&R’s contract claims are barred by the statute of limitations. Causes of action based on a breach of warranty under the Delaware Commercial Code have a four-year statute of limitations period. 6 Del. C. § 2-725. The statute indicates that a “breach of warranty occurs when tender of delivery is made, except that where a warranty explicitly extends to future performance of the goods and discovery of the breach must await the time of such performance.... ” Id. (emphasis supplied). Unlike the judicial gloss applicable to other statutes in tort law, the clock by express statutory provision ticks in warranty actions when the breach occurs even though the buyer does not know the goods are defective. Lecates v. Hertrich Pontiac Buick Co., Del.Super., 515 A.2d 163, 175 (1986). The “time of discovery rule,” recognized in other contexts, has not been extended to warranty actions. Elmer v. Tenneco Resins, Inc., D.Del., 698 F.Supp. 535, 539 (1988). Thus, the date of the purchase is key. Harvey v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., Del.Super., 315 A.2d 599, 601 (1973). Nor do the warranty claims here survive on the grounds of equitable estoppel or fraudulent concealment. Again the Lecates case at 515 A.2d 176-77 appears to foreclose this argument. Fraudulent concealment “requires the twin showing of (a) the defendant’s knowledge of the alleged wrong, and (b) an affirmative act of concealment by the defendant.” Just as in Lecates, “[n]ot having alleged any actual misrepresentation or fraudulent artifice, plaintiffs’ contention boils down to a charge that [Shell’s] ‘knowing silence’ qualifies as fraudulent concealment.” But “[m]ere silence or failure to disclose does not constitute such fraudulent concealment as will suspend operation of [a statute of limitations].” Lecates, 515 A.2d at 176 (quoting former 54 C.J.S. “Limitation of Actions,” § 206 at 226-28 (1948); see now 54 C.J.S. “Limitations of Actions,” § 90(c) at 130-31 (1987)).
To extend a contract warranty beyond the four-year statute of limitations, there must be evidence of an express warranty extending to, or beginning after, a specific future point in time beyond the four-year window. Pack & Process, Inc. v. Celotex Corp., Del.Super., 503 A.2d 646, 652 (1985). An implied warranty, by its very nature, cannot extend to future performance because it makes no explicit representations concerning longevity. Lecates, 515 A.2d at 174 n. 15. Therefore, only an express warranty that speaks to a specific point in the future falls within this “future performance exception.”
Warranties that clearly and expressly speak to a future point in time fall within this exception. The more difficult question is whether warranties that speak generally about product longevity, without express language, fall within this exception. Delaware State Courts have taken a somewhat flexible view on this issue, allowing a warranty to fall within the exception provided there is a factual basis to believe a warranty was intended to live beyond the traditional four-year statute of limitations. Pack & Process, 503 A.2d at 652.
In Pack & Process, the defendant manufactured roofing materials used in the construction of the plaintiffs roof. Upon completion of the roof, the defendant issued a 20-year bond to be used for the repair of ordinary wear and tear. The defendant was also obligated under the bond to inspect the roof any time within the twenty years if it required repairs. The defendant did not make express, representations that the roof would last for a particular amount of time. Id. at 648.
After the four-year statute of limitations expired, the plaintiff discovered the roof was defective and filed a complaint against the defendant alleging, inter alia, breach of warranty. Defendant moved for summary judgment on the issue citing the statute of limitations. The Superior Court determined that, in light of the 20-year bond and the defendant’s commitment to inspect the roof for twenty years, a question of fact still existed as to whether the defendant created a “future warranty” extending beyond the four-year statute of limitations. Id. at 656.
The Arbor Pointe Apartment Complex was completed sometime in 1987 and the complaint was filed in 1994. Unless Shell’s warranty falls within the “future performance exception,” the statute of limitations has lapsed.
Shell did not provide any information stating polybutylene piping would last for a specific number of years. Although Shell did represent, via literature, that polybutylene pipe was freeze safe, corrosion resistant and comparable to copper pipe, these vague representations are not explicit enough to create a future warranty. The mere assertion that polybutylene is comparable to copper piping falls short of a warranty that “explicitly extends to future performance.” Unlike the facts in Pack & Process, nothing in the record indicates a representation pointing to a specific point in the future.
To survive a substantiated motion for summary judgment, the non-moving party must produce evidence showing there is a genuine issue of material fact for trial. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 325, 106 S.Ct. 2548, 91 L.Ed.2d 265 (1986). Here, Plaintiff has failed to provide information to create a genuine issue of fact as to whether there was a guarantee of future performance by Shell. Accordingly, Shell’s Motion for Summary Judgment on counts one through three must be granted because the four-year statute of limitations has lapsed.
2. Breach of Warranty under 6 Del. C. § 2-318
Even without the statute of limitations issue, S&R, as a limited partnership, lacks standing to bring a warranty claim under 6 Del. C. § 2-318. The plain language of the statute states that “a seller’s warranty, whether express or implied, extends to any natural person who may reasonably be expected to use, consume or be affected by the goods_” 6 Del. C. § 2-318 (emphasis supplied). The determination of exactly who is a “natural person” begins with an analysis of the statute and its history.
Prior to the adoption of the Uniform Commercial Code (“Code”), an injured party was required to establish privity with the defendant to recover under a breach of warranty claim. See, e.g,. Ciociola v. Delaware Coca-Cola Bottling Co., 172 A.2d 252 (1961). This was often difficult to accomplish when the ultimate user of a defective product was not the direct purchaser. Id. To counter the harsh result of this rule, the legislature enacted Section 2-318, abolishing the privity requirement and granting standing to those likely to be injured by defective products. Delaware Study Comments to Section 2-318, at 59 (1974); Cline v. Prowler Ind. of Maryland, Inc., Del.Supr., 418 A.2d 968, 976 (1980).
When the Code was amended by the American Law Institute in 1966, Section 2-318 was changed to offer three distinct alternatives. Cline, 418 A.2d at 978. The three alternatives were as follows:
Alternative A
A seller’s warranty whether express or implied extends to any natural person who is in the family or household of his buyer or who is a guest in his home if it is reasonable to expect that such person may use, consume or be affected by the goods and who is injured in person by breach of the warranty. A seller may not exclude or limit the operation of this section.
Alternative B
A seller’s warranty whether express or implied extends to any natural person who may reasonably be expected to use, consume or be affected by the goods and who is injured in person by breach of the warranty. A seller may not exclude or limit the operation of this section.
Alternative C
A seller’s warranty whether express or implied extends to any person who may reasonably be expected to use, consume or be affected by the goods and who is injured by breach of the warranty. A seller may not exclude or limit the operation of this section with respect to injury to the person of an individual to whom the warranty extends. As amended 1966.
1A Uniform Laws Annotated § 2-318 (1989) (emphasis supplied). Delaware adopted Alternative B, in a somewhat modified form, by omitting the words “in person” before the words “by breach.” Id. at 559.
The American Law Institute’s Official Comment to Section 2-318 states:
3. [Alternative A] expressly includes as beneficiaries within its provisions the family, household, and guests of the purchaser.... [Alternative B] is designed for states where the case law has already developed further and for those that desire to expand the class of beneficiaries. [Alternative C] goes further, following the trend of modern decisions as indicated by Restatement of Torts 2d § 402A (Tentative Draft No. 10, 1965) in extending the rule beyond injuries to the person.
Id. at 558 (emphasis supplied).
It appears that when the legislature decided on a modified Alternative B, as opposed to Alternative C, the legislature expressed an intention to exclude legal entities from protection. Alternative C, the most liberal of the alternatives, applies to all “persons,” while Alternatives A and B extend only to “natural persons.” Additionally, the Official Comment states that only Alternative C would extend protection beyond injuries to “the person.” It would appear that our legislature did extend recovery to “natural persons” beyond injuries to the person and, to that extent, adopted Alternative C. See Martin v. Ryder Truck Rental Inc., Del.Supr., 353 A.2d 581, 583 n. 3 (1976); Cline, 418 A.2d at 978-79 (discussing 6 Del. C. § 2-318).
The case law also provides additional guidance on the subject. In Dover Downs, Inc. v. Koppers Co. Inc., Del.Super., C.A. No. 80C-0C-2, Wright, J., (Feb. 8, 1984), this Court stated that absent privity, 6 Del. C. § 2-318 does not extend warranty protection to corporations. Id. at 4. Further evidence of the distinction between “persons” and “natural persons” is found in various Delaware cases and legal reference material.
To hold that Section 2-318 applies to legal entities such as corporations and limited partnerships would nullify the legislature’s decision in choosing Alternative B over Alternative C on this very point. While it may be desirable to extend warranty protection beyond natural persons, this change in policy should be made by the Legislature rather than the Court. Ciociola, 172 A.2d at 257. Accordingly, S&R, being a limited partnership, lacks standing to bring a claim under 6 Del. C. § 2-318 and Shell’s Motion for Summary Judgment on counts one through three must be granted.
3. Conclusion on Warranty Claims
For the two independent reasons stated above, each being sufficient by itself, Shell’s Motion for Summary Judgment on counts one through three is granted.
B. NEGLIGENCE
Counts seven and eleven allege negligent conduct on the part of Shell. Count seven alleges that Shell was negligent in supplying information to the industry while count eleven alleges negligent manufacturing and testing. Shell contends that these actions should be dismissed as not within the statute of limitations. S&R asserts that they are entitled to toll the statute of limitations under the time of discovery rale due to the complexity of the underlying problem. S&R says that given the complex nature of the problem and Shell’s alleged effort to conceal industry wide failures of polybutylene pipe, S&R is entitled to have the statute of limitations tolled.
Generally, a three-year statute of limitation under 10 Del. C. § 8106 governs claims of negligence. The time of discovery rule provides that in certain cases, a cause of action does not accrue until a party has reason to know that he or she has a cause of action. Pack & Process, 503 A.2d at 650-51. Therefore, the limitation period does not begin to ran until the plaintiff has reason to know that a wrong has been committed provided the injuries are “inherently unknowable” and sustained by a “blamelessly ignorant” plaintiff. Kaufman v. C.L. McCabe & Sons, Inc., Del.Supr., 603 A.2d 831, 835 (1992). It is not the actual discovery of the reason for the injury that starts the clock, but the discovery of facts sufficient to put a person of ordinary intelligence on inquiry which, if pursued, would lead to discovery. Becker v. Hamada, Del.Supr., 455 A.2d 353, 356 (1982) (quoting Omaha Paper Stock Co. v. Martin K. Eby Constr. Co., Neb.Supr., 193 Neb. 848, 230 N.W.2d 87, 89-90 (1975)).
S&R’s complaint was filed in 1994, more than three years after Arbor Pointe experienced major plumbing failures. Unless the time of discovery rale is applied, S&R’s complaint is untimely. The question to be answered now is whether S&R should have been on notice that multiple plumbing failures were attributable to defects in polybu-tylene pipe.
In Queen Anne Pier Condominium Council v. Raley, Del.Super., C.A. No. 85C-JA-10, Lee, J., 1988 WL 7618 (Jan. 26, 1988), the plaintiff sued a real estate developer for damages caused by a defective roof. The roof began leaking in 1981, but suit was not filed until 1985, after the three-year statute of limitations had expired. The developer claimed that the time of discovery was in 1981, when the roof first began to leak. Conversely, the plaintiff asserted that they did not attribute the leaks to faulty construction until 1982, when they learned of the generally defective condition of the roof. Id. at 7. This Court denied a motion for summary judgment on the statute of limitations stating that there was a material question of fact concerning when the cause of action was “discovered.” Id. at 8. See also Pack & Process, 503 A.2d at 650-51 (applying the time of discovery rale when plaintiff failed to attribute a leaking roof to defective roofing materials); Affordable Home Enterprises, Inc. v. Nelson, Del.Super., C.A. No. 91C-08-024, Steel, V.C., 1994 WL 315227 (May 25, 1994)(ORDER) (refusing to grant summary judgment on a time of discovery issue when facts were in dispute concerning whether plaintiff should have attributed septic pipe clogs to a defective septic system).
Arbor Pointe experienced plumbing failures from its inception, culminating in a major break in 1989. Despite these continuing problems, S&R waited more than three years to file a complaint. Applying a reasonable person standard, and viewing the facts in a light most favorable to the Plaintiff, a dispute still exists as to whether S&R, in the exercise of due diligence, should have attributed multiple plumbing failures to defective plumbing materials. Just as the plaintiffs in Queen An?ie did not attribute a leaking roof to faulty roofing materials, S&R may have failed to see the connection between plumbing leaks and defective polybutylene pipe. One alternative explanation, for example, is that the leaks were a result of faulty installation. This explanation sounds even more reasonable given Shell’s alleged concealment of inherent defects in polybutylene piping systems.
Given the complexity of the inherent defects in polybutylene pipe and Shell’s potential concealment of the problem, the determination of whether S&R should have been on notice to investigate faulty plumbing systems should be left to the trier of fact. Affo?'dable Home, at 6. Accordingly, Shell’s Motion for Summary Judgment on counts seven and eleven is denied.
C. CIVIL CONSPIRACY
Count eight of Plaintiffs complaint alleges civil conspiracy. The elements of civil conspiracy include: 1) a confederation or combination of two or more persons; 2) an unlawful act done in furtherance of the conspiracy; and 3) actual damages. Nicolet Inc. v. Nutt, Del.Supr., 525 A.2d 146, 149-50 (1987). There is normally no duty to speak absent a fiduciary or contractual relationship. Id. at 150.
Here, Shell had received prior complaints and was on notice of reported problems with the piping system. The record is rife with evidence that the crimping fittings and piping materials were inadequate. There was, however, no fiduciary or contractual relationship between Shell and S&R requiring Shell to affirmatively disclose this information. Nor is there evidence of any action by Shell with another designed to victimize S&R. Plaintiff has failed to establish that there was an unlawful act done in furtherance of the conspiracy, even though Shell had evidence of product failures dating back to 1980. Shell’s Motion for Summary Judgment on count eight is granted.
D. CONSUMER FRAUD
Count nine of S&R’s complaint alleges that Shell committed consumer fi-aud as defined by 6 Del. C. § 2513. Shell counters by asserting that S&R never relied on Shell’s representations in choosing the polybutylene plumbing system. While a fraud action at common law requires the plaintiff to prove reliance, there is no corresponding reliance requirement in 6 Del. C. § 2513. The Plaintiff need only prove that the Defendant intentionally concealed material facts with the intent that others would rely upon such concealment. Id.
Since there is evidence in the record suggesting that Shell was aware of material defects in polybutylene plumbing systems as far back as 1980, a motion for summary judgment on this issue would be inappropriate. Accordingly, Defendant’s Motion for Summary Judgment on count nine is denied.
E.DECEPTIVE TRADE PRACTICES
Count ten of S&R’s complaint alleges deceptive trade practices. S&R does not have standing to bring a claim of deceptive trade practices under 6 Del. C. 2511-2526, 2531 et. seq. Deceptive trade practices arise only from those unfair trade practices that interfere with the business of another, so only competing businesses have standing to raise the claim. Grand Ventures, Inc. v. Whaley, Del.Supr., 632 A.2d 63, 67 (1993). Because S&R is a consumer, not a competing business, it lacks standing to raise this issue and Summary Judgment is granted.
F.ALLOCATION OF DAMAGES
Shell argues that no allocation of damages can fairly be attributed to their product. Shell cites F.E. Myers Co. v. Pipe Maintenance Services Inc., D.Del., 599 F.Supp. 697 (1984) for the proposition that a substantial amount of damages may be a direct result of other factors. S&R argues that Shell would be responsible for the defect and repairs. The Court can adequately deal with damages at trial. Summary Judgment is premature; there is yet a dispute as to the causation of the damages, it is difficult to imagine that the Court cannot find a methodology to resolve the damage attribution question.
TV. CONCLUSION
Summary Judgment in favor of Shell is appropriate on S&R’s claims of implied warranty of merchantability (count one), implied warranty of fitness for a particular purpose (count two), express warranty (count three), civil conspiracy (count eight) and deceptive trade practices (count ten). Summary Judgment is not appropriate as to negligence (counts seven and eleven), consumer fraud (count nine) and the allocation of damages. For all of the foregoing reasons, Shell’s Motions for Summary judgment are GRANTED as to counts one, two, three, eight, and ten. Shell's Motions for Summary Judgment with respect to counts seven, nine, eleven and the allocation of damages are DENIED. IT IS SO ORDERED.
1
. Defendant withdrew a third motion, directed to counts 4, 5 and 6, counts based on various degrees of misrepresentation.
2
. Plaintiff's Response to Motion for Summary Judgment (Dk. No. 97, at 2). The literature distributed by Shell makes claims that polybutyl-ene pipe is "comparable to” copper pipe, but there is no representation that the piping would last “as long as" copper pipe. Id.
Plaintiffs also rely on the testimony of Mr. Charles Johnson, a former S&R principal. Mr. Johnson stated that Shell’s literature represented that polybutylene pipe would "perform either equal to or better than copper pipe installation.” (Deposition of Mr. Charles Johnson, Id. at T44: 19-20). Once again, this does not explicitly support the contention that Shell represented that polybutylene pipe would last as long as copper pipe.
3
.Plaintiff’s Response to Motion for Summary Judgment (Dk. No. 97, at 2).
4
. The section governing the statute of limitations in contracts for the sale of goods, 6 Del. C. § 2-725, states in its entirety:
§ 2-725 Statute of limitations in contracts for sale.
(1) An action for breach of any contract for sale must be commenced within 4 years after the cause of action has accrued. By the original agreement the parties may reduce the period of limitations to not less than one year but may not extend it.
(2) A cause of action accrues when the breach occurs, regardless of the aggrieved party's lack of knowledge of the breach. A breach of warranty occurs when tender of delivery is made, except that where a warranty explicitly extends to future performance of the goods and discovery of the breach must await the time of such performance the cause of action accrues when the breach is or should have been discovered.
(3) Where an action commenced within the time limited by subsection (1) is so terminated as to leave available a remedy by another action for the same breach such other action may be commenced after the expiration of the time limited and within 6 months after the termination of the first action unless the termination resulted from voluntary discontinuance or from dismissal for failure or neglect to prosecute.
(4) This section does not alter the law on tolling of the statute of limitations nor does it apply to causes of action which have accrued before this subtitle becomes effective. (Emphasis supplied).
5
. Compare Kaufman v. C.L. McCabe & Sons, Inc., Del.Supr., 603 A.2d 831, 835 (1992) (discussing the "time of discovery rule” in tort law).
6
. But, see Addison v. Emerson Electric Co., D.Del., C.A. No. 96-146-SLR, Robinson, D.J., 1997 WL 129327 (Feb. 24, 1997), Mem. Op. at 3 ("Generally, the “future performance” exception of § 2-725 is construed narrowly”).
7
. Since S&R lacks direct privity with Shell, they must seek standing as a third party beneficiary under 6 Del. C. § 2-318. S&R lacks direct privity because Shell only manufactured the resin used in the production of polybutylene pipes, it did not manufacture or sell the final product.
8
. The Delaware Study Comment to Section 2-318 states in part:
The case law in most of the larger commercial states has resulted in large measure in the abolition of the privity requirement and the adoption of a rule which is substantially in accord with the version of § 2-318 adopted by Delaware. The Delaware Uniform Commercial Code Committee is of the opinion that the recommended amendment is reasonable, is in accord with modem commentaries, and will bring the Delaware law in substantial conformity with the law of a number of states (including the larger commercial states) which have adopted the Code. The variation in the language of § 2-318 is required to accomplish this purpose because of the decision of the Delaware Supreme Court in Ciociola v. Delaware Coca-Cola Bottling Co., 53 Delaware 477, 172 A.2d 252 (1961). In that case the Court held that Delaware was committed to the common law rule governing actions for breach of implied warranties, and that any change would have to be made by the Legislature rather than the Judicial Branch.
9
. Plaintiff contends that § 2-318 is no longer intended to be limited to actions by "natural persons” and cites to footnote 9 of Pack & Process, 503 A.2d at 659 n. 9. This footnote states "the defendant concedes that § 2-318 is no longer intended to be limited to actions by 'natural persons.’ See Delaware Study Comment to 6 Del. C. § 2-318.” But this statement is a mere concession by the defendant in Pack & Process; there is nothing in the Delaware Study Comment to support such a statement.
10
. In talking about a corporation’s need to be represented by counsel, the Supreme Court has stated that "a corporation, though a legally recognized entity, is regarded as an artificial or fictional entity, and not a natural person.” Transpolymer Ind., Inc., v. Chapel Main Corp., Del. Supr., No. 284, 1990, Horsey, J., 1990 WL 168276 (Sep. 18, 1990)(ORDER); Blacks Law Dictionary defines a human being as a natural person. Blacks Law Dictionary 6th ed. 1142 (1990).
Case law from other jurisdictions has also alluded that corporations are not “natural persons." See, e.g., Monsanto Co. v. Alden Leeds, Inc., N.J.Super., 130 N.J.Super. 245, 326 A.2d 90, 95 (1974); Fischbach & Moore International Corp. v. Crane Barge R-14, D.Md., 476 F.Supp. 282, 288 (1979), aff'd, 632 F.2d 1123 (1980) (failing to extend warranty protection to corporate defendants).
The Chancellor:
In October of 1938, Thomas W. Turner made his will, in which he devised certain lands, near Seaford, Delaware, to his sister, Sallie B. Turner, for life. Some three days later, he executed an instrument in writing, under seal, in which he gave John R. Eddington, of Federalsburg, Maryland, the right, at his option, to purchase the lands so devised, together with other lands belonging to him, for the full purchase price of $10,000; pursuant to the terms of that instrument $100 of that sum was paid when it was signed. Thomas W. Turner died some weeks later. His will was duly probated, and his sons, Arthur D. Turner and Thomas H. Turner, his only heirs-at-law, were the executors therein named, and qualified as such. Under the terms of the option, Mr. Eddington had sixty days within which to notify Turner, “his heirs or assigns,” that he would “take, accept and purchase said property at the price and terms aforesaid. In case notice of acceptance” was given as aforesaid, the deed was to be delivered within thirty days thereafter. If Eddington should “not notify the party of the first part, his heirs and assigns” that he elected “to take, accept and purchase said property at the price * * * aforesaid” within sixty days from the date, the “agreement” was to be null and void.
After Mr. Turner’s death, but within the prescribed time, Mr. Eddington notified the Turner heirs that he intended to exercise his option rights, and subsequently tendered the balance of the agreed purchase price, but Arthur D. Turner, Thomas H. Turner and Sallie B. Turner refused to convey. On a bill filed against them, specific performance was ordered by this court, and the conveyance was subsequently made by a master, appointed to carry out that order, § 4384, Rev. Code 1935. The whole of the purchase price, less costs, or $9,637.36, was then paid into this court. The executors of Thomas- W. Turner claim the whole of that sum as personal property belonging to their father’s estate, and that Sallie B. Turner, the life beneficiary of a portion of the land covered by the option, but ultimately sold, has no interest, whatever, in the proceeds of the sale. Lawes v. Bennett, (1 Cox Ch. Cas. 168, 29 Eng. Rep. 1111) and many subsequent English cases apparently support that claim. Townley v. Bedwell, 14 Ves. Jr. 591; 33 Eng. Rep. 648, Weeding v. Weeding, 70 Eng. Rep. 812; In re Isaacs, [1894] 3 Ch. 506; 4 Pomeroy’s Eq. Jur., (5th Ed.) § 1163.
Lawes v. Bennett involved an option of the lessee, in a long term lease, to purchase the leased premises within a limited period, for a specified price. That right was exercised some time after the death of the lessor. Prior to the execution of the lease, the lessor had made his will, in which he devised all of his real estate to his cousin, John Bennett, in fee. He also bequeathed all of his personal property, in equal parts, to Bennett and his sister, who were appointed “joint executors.” When the option was exercised, Bennett conveyed the leased premises, and the purchase price was paid to him. Some years later, his sister learned that the option had been exercised and filed a bill for an accounting against Bennett. The reporter of the case, in stating the facts prior to the opinion, pointed out that the single question was “whether the premises being part of the testator’s real estate at the time of his death, but sold afterwards, under the circumstances aforesaid, the purchase money should be considered as part of the real or personal estate of the testator”. Lord Kenyon, then Master' of the Rolls, said:
“It is very clear that if a man seized of a real estate contract to sell it, and died before the contract is carried into execution, it is personal property of him. Then the only possible difficulty in this case is, that it is left to the election of Douglass (the lessee who had the option to purchase) whether it shall be real or personal. . It seems to me to make no distinction at all.”
Lord Kenyon also said:
“When the party, who has the power of making the election, has elected, the whole is to be referred back to the original agreement, and the only difference is that the real estate is converted into personal at a future period.”
He, therefore, held that the purchase price was “part of the personal estate of the testator,” and that Bennett’s sister, the complainant, was entitled to “one moiety thereof.”
In Townley v. Bedwell, supra, Lord Eldon, referring to Lawes v. Bennett, said:
“That case was very much argued, and I do not mean to say that a great deal may not he urged against it.”
He, nevertheless, followed it, and it has apparently been adhered to by the English courts ever since. But they seem to have been governed by authority rather than by reason, and have frequently doubted whether the rule laid down in that case was in accord with established principles governing the law of conversion in equity. See In re Hydon, [1901] 1 Ch. 750; Re Carrington, [1932] 1 Ch. 1; Chafee & Simpson Cas. on Equity, 899 note. Moreover, while the rule announced in Lawes v. Bennett still applies in England between the heir or devisee of the vendor and his personal representatives, the courts of that country have consistently refused to extend it. It does not apply there between a vendor and the purchaser under an option contract. Edwards v. West, L. R. 7 Ch. Div. 858; In re Adams, L. R. [1884] 27 Ch. Div. 394; 4 Pomeroy’s Eq. Jur., (5th Ed.) § 1163. It does not apply if, after the option to purchase is given, the owner makes a will, specifically devising the property covered thereby. Under such circumstances, the devisee, the then owner, is entitled to the purchase price if the option is subsequently exercised. Emus v. Smith, 2 DeG. & S. 722, 64 Eng. Rep. 323; Grant v. Vause, 62 Eng. Rep. 1026. Nor does a conversion take place, as of the date of the option, if the grantee of that right dies, and it is subsequently exercised by his personal representatives. In re Adams, supra; 4 Pomeroy’s Eq. Jur., § 1163, note. Furthermore, under the rule announced in Lawes v. Bennett, it is now clear that, in case of the death of the owner before the option to purchase has been exercised, both the land, as such, and the rents therefrom go to his heirs-at-law, or devisee. Re Carrington [1932] 1 Ch. 1; In re Marlay, [1915] 2 Ch. 264; Re Isaacs, [1894] 3 Ch. 506. Under that rule, it is obvious that the equitable conversion of real estate into personal property does not take place at the date of the giving of the option; it takes place only when the option is exercised; “when the condition is fulfilled, which makes the contract effective.” 4 Pomeroy’s Eq. Jur., § 1163, supra. The recent English cases point that out. In re Marlay, supra; Be Carrington, supra; Be Isaacs, supra. In the meantime, in that country, on the death of the owner who has given the option to purchase, the heir-at-law or devisee “has an estate in fee, defeasible upon the exercise of the option.” In re Marlay, supra; Re Carrington, supra; 4 Pomeroy’s Eq. Jur., § 1163, supra. It is correctly said that their right to the rents and profits cannot be supported on any other theory. In re Marlay, supra; 4 Pomeroy’s Eq. Jur., § 1163, supra. If the option is not exercised, and the purchase price is not paid within the prescribed time, the heir-at-law or devisee continues to be the real owner. If the option is exercised, the English cases are by no means clear as to the precise reason why the rights of the parties should relate back and the purchase price should be regarded as personal property of the deceased owner, rather than of the heir-at-law or devisee.
Romer, L. J., in the Carrington case, supra, aptly said:
“I do not myself understand, apart from the authorities, why this should be so. Conversion, obviously, takes effect from the exercise of the option only, and in the hands of the devisee of real estate the property as from the exercise of the option would be personal and not real estate. That is to say, upon his death it would pass as part of his personal estate, but why the exercise of the option should have the effect of taking away the real estate from the person to whom it -has been devised and giving it to the person who has the personal estate is what I have never been able to understand.”
Furthermore, from a practical standpoint, the inconvenience of the English rule is apparent. Under that rule, years may elapse before it can be definitely and finally determined whether real property, subject to an option to purchase, must be regarded as land, belonging to the heir or devisee of the owner, or whether it may be personal prop erty which must be ultimately administered by his personal representatives. Some American cases have, nevertheless, approved and followed Lawes v. Bennett. McKay v. Carrington, Fed. Cas. No. 8,841, 1 McLean 50; Keep v. Miller, 42 N. J. Eq. 100, 6 A. 495; Smith Co. v. Anderson, 84 N. J. Eq. 681, 95 A. 358; Newport Water Works v. Sisson, 18 R. I. 411, 28 A. 336.
But others, and perhaps the majority, have regarded that case as unsound in principle, and have refused to be governed by it. Rockland-Rockport Lime Co. v. Leary, 203 N. Y. 469, 97 N. E. 43, L. R. A. 1916E, 352, Ann. Cas. 1913B, 62; In re Bisbee’s Est., 177 Wis. 77, 187 N. W. 653; Smith v. Loewenstein, 50 Ohio St. 346, 34 N. E. 159; Inghram, Adm’r., v. Chandler, 179 Iowa 304, 161 N. W. 434, L. R. A. 1917D, 713.
The doctrine of the equitable conversion of land into money rests on the presumed intention of the owner of the property and on the maxim that equity regards as done what ought to be done. Rockland-Rockport Lime Co. v. Leary., supra; Inghram, Adr’r., v. Chandler, supra; 2 Pomeroy’s Eq. Jur., (5th Ed.) §§ 364, 365, 368. That rule applies when an absolute, and not a mere possible or contingent conversion is intended. Rockland-Rockport Lime Co. v. Leary, supra; 2 Pomeroy’s Eq. Jur., § 365, supra. It necessarily applies when there is a definite and binding contract to sell and purchase land (Smith v. Loewenstein, supra; 2 Pomeroy’s Eq. Jur., § 372, supra) ; but, when there is a mere possibility of sale, no conversion takes place. 2 Pomeroy’s Eq. Jur., § 365, supra.
Under the ordinary bilateral contract to sell and purchase land, the owner is not only bound to convey, but is also entitled to the agreed purchase price. No such rule could be applied here. When Thomas W. Turner gave the option to purchase, whether he would ever be obligated to convey was wholly conditional, and dependent upon the acts of another; upon notice and the subsequent payment of the specified price within the prescribed time. At his death, the option had not been exercised, and he had no enforceable rights against Eddington, and could pass none to his personal representatives. Smith v. Loewenstein, Rockland-Rockport Lime Co. v. Leary, supra. The property devised to Sallie B. Turner was then land; even the English cases concede that. When the option was ultimately exercised, that portion of the land sold belonged to her for life, and after her death to the heirs-at-law of the testator. Notwithstanding the English rule, the whole of the proceeds of the sale, therefore, belonged to them, as such, subject, however, to the right of Sallie B. Turner to the interest on such portion of it for life, as this court may determine.
Proof will be taken and solicitors heard on that question.
